Geraint, rydych chi'n cymryd yn March 2001. Rydych chi'n ymwneud yn y ffordd ar ddod o blynyddoedd.
Rydwch chi'n rhaid gweld llawer o gwaith. Pan oeddwch chi'n mynd yn y ffordd?
Roeddwn i'n cymryd yn y gyrfa fforddol, neu fy ffordd ar ddod o bryd, yn ymwneud yn ymwneud yn 1960.
Roeddwn i'n cymryd i gyrfa ffordd ar ddod o'r gyrfa Cylgwyn, yna yn y llant Dafri.
Roeddwn i'n cymryd un mlynedd yno, a yna rydw i'n mynd i'r ffordd Caio'r ddod o blynyddoedd y ddod o blynyddoedd, pan oeddwn i'n cymryd i fynd i ddod o bryd yn 1963.
Yn y period pan oeddwn i'n Caio, roeddwn i'n cymryd i fynd i ffordd Tawi, mae hynny'n fy mhroedd mwyaf, yn y ffordd Tawi, yn 1963, i gael y cyfleoedd o plawio, o bwyd ymlaen i'w plantio.
Roeddwn i'n cymryd i fy mhroedd i fod yn ffyrdd o'r gyrfa Cylgwyn i'r ddod o bwynydd o bwyd yn
A yna ymlaen o'r plawio o'r ffordd Tawi, roeddwn i'n cymryd i fy mhroedd i fod yn ffyrdd o'r plawio yn y ffordd Tawi.
A'u debyg lifetime wedi bottles yn cael ei f dir snacks i mewn a'i
beukaid ar y mor o'r bore Pa storyniant a'i barивает.
Cofharaenddi, roedd dyna arian algorithmol drwy gael hynny.
ac roedd yn bobl i'n mynd i gyrraedd y plaw sydd wedi cael gwybwyno yn ei.
Mae'r gwybwyno yn cael gwybwyno 6 fwynt.
Ac wrth gwrs, y ffordd y byddai'n mynd i'r ddwy a'r ddwy,
yw gyrraedd yma yn y ddwy yn y ddwy.
Mae'n un pwynt i'r un.
Felly dyna fy nghymdeithas i Tawai Forest.
Felly yn y ddwy, y plaw ddim yn cael gyrraedd ymddygiadol?
Nid. Mae'n rhaid i'n cael ei gyrraedd.
Mae'n rhaid i'n cael ei gyrraedd, a'i llwyfio, a'i llwyfio, a'i llwyfio.
Mae'n gwybwyno am y pwynt i'r un,
a'r 18 oed, a'i ddweud, nid oes yn dda i gyrraedd ffysicol.
a'i ddweud, nid oes yn dda i gyrraedd ffysicol.
Ond roedd yn eithaf cyfle i'r un,
roedd yn eithaf cyfle i'r un,
yn ôl i'r un,
roedd yn sianol yn ymddygiadol.
Felly roedd yn eithaf cyfle i'r un,
yn ôl i'r un,
roedd yn eithaf cyfle i'r un,
ond mae'n gwneud yn fwyaf o'ch un,
rwy'n credu,
i weithio yn y cyfle honno,
yn ôl i'r un,
Strafflir.
Es 믿d,
fe was ymumujodd yn Arwen.
Pan oedd yn cychwyn Cymru a oedd yn ddioddefnau
Dylwg Chefnog Lywid Cwahel Tongr ножeng sydd wedi dances.
The sun was shining over the north….
so….
pe giwnoedd yn oed a'u fath o.
Mae drwy ymwneud région mwy o bobl yn microphone nesaf pob.
Mae'n fy nghymdeithas ym Mhryd Tawi.
Yna roeddwn i'n mynd yno, i'r Ffyrdd Caio ar y period o amser, ac yna yn ym Mhryd ym 1963, roeddwn i'n mynd i'r Ffyrdd ysgol.
Yn ddwy o bryd yno.
Roeddwn i'n mynd ym Mfyrdd ysgol ac roeddwn i'n mynd i'r prostyn môr, yw ym Mhryd Ebbo.
Roeddwn i'n mynd yno ar y ffordd.
Roeddwn i'n mynd yno ar y ffordd, roeddwn i'n gwybod pobl yno, roeddwn i'n mynd i'r ffordd, ac yna ar y ffordd y ddwy o bryd,
roedd y ffordd ysgol yn mynd i'r ffordd a dweud, nid oes yn cael ei ddod yn y bagiau, rydych chi'n ymwneud.
Y ddwy o bryd yno, rydych chi'n mynd i'r ffordd i'r Tawi.
Mae hynny'n rhan o'r ystod y gallwn ni'n mynd i'r ystod, a ysgrifennol ym Mhryd Tawi.
Roeddwn i'n mynd yno yn 1965, yna ymlaen, roeddwn i'n mynd yn octobr 1965.
Ac yn y tîm, y ffordd yna oedd Danny Lewis.
A John Jones oedd y ffordd ym Mhryd Tawi.
Evan Jones oedd ffwrdd ym Mhryd Tawi.
A roeddwn i'n cael ymddygiad am y Tawi.
Yn ystod y ffordd yma, roeddwn yn mynd i'r ffordd ysgol,
yn mynd i'r ffordd ysgol o'r ffordd ym Mhryd Tawi.
Roeddwn i wedi gwneud ychydig o ffartygliau.
Roeddwn i'n mynd yn y ffordd ym Mhryd Tawi a'i dweud,
dyna'r ystod y gallwch chi'n mynd i'r ddod yn y ddwy o bryd.
Mae 22 gweithwyr ffwrdd yma sy'n mynd i'w gael ymlaen i'w gael y cydnabodau y gallwch chi ei gael.
Mae'n dda.
Yn hynod, Mae Rhywun Meirion Dairys yn ymlaen i mi.
Mae Rhywun Meirion yn mynd i mewn ac roeddwn yn mynd i'w gael ei ymlaen.
A roeddwn i wedi cael y ddwy o bryd gyda Mae Rhywun Meirion,
roedd yn carziehen mewn cyllir dros maen cryfnogi'r ffeillio fel raint a ddiрос i ei gyrraedd yn yr un mewn .
Yr un contacted a ysbryd agricultural and prepared and prepared for planting.
A allwn iwood yn amlwg am ei bab Bran…
Roeddwn yn gy DAVID,
wedi cael ei pw решィoch yn swch i fyny i styried.
Roeddwn i'n cael gweithredu'r gweithredu o'r gweithredu o'r gweithredu o'r gweithredu.
Roeddwn i ddim wedi cael gweithredu. Roeddwn i'n cael gweithredu yn 10.7 sq. yn Tregarwyr.
Roeddwn i'n cael gweithredu yn 10.7 sq. yn Tregarwyr, yn ddaeddau yn fawr iawn, a'n mynd i ddod i'r gweithredu ymlaen.
Roeddwn i'n cael gweithredu yn 10.11 yna i gydag fy marn i gydag fy mhan yma ymlaen.
Ond roeddwn yn ddaeddon cyfle i ddysgu sut mae'r gweithredu wedi'i gwneud.
Byddai'r ffordd o'r hwst yn ei fod yn ei ffordd i'w ddweud yn y pen ddwy a ddweud y papurwch yn ddiwedd?
Rwy'n credu bod y ffordd yw'n ymwneud â'r ffordd i'w dysgu'r ymgyrch yn y pen ddwy,
a fydd angen ymwneud â'r pethau yn y pen ddwy, a fydd angen i chi ddysgu ar eich hunain, a bydd angen i chi ddweud â'ch pwmpenwyr neu'ch bosib yn ymgyrch i'w ddweud.
A oedd y ffordd yw'r pŵer yn ei ddifynu i chi?
Nid, yn eithaf, roedd yn dda iawn. Roedd yn dda iawn, yn y ffordd ymwneud â phobl o'r ffordd y tuwy ffyrdd.
Roedd yn cael ymwneud â'r pwmpenwyr. Roedd yn cael ymwneud â'r pwmpenwyr.
Roedd yn cael ymwneud â'r pwmpenwyr.
Roedd yn cael ymwneud â phobl o'r pwmpenwyr.
Rwy'n meddu i ddweud aton ar gyfer phobl o'r pwmpenwyr.
oedd yn dda iawn i mi oherwydd roeddwn i ddim yn gwybod rhywbeth yn gwneud rhywbeth yn gwneud.
Dyna'r hyn a ddiddordeb y byddaf i'n ei gwybod.
Dyna'r hyn a ddiddordeb y byddaf i'n gwybod.
A oes gennych chi ddiddordeb gyda phobl lleol fel y ffarmau?
I unrhyw ddegwg, oherwydd un o'r problemau a ddiddordeb yma
oedd ein bod yn cael ei ddiddordeb.
Nid oedd ymddygiadau a'r bwyr neu beth sy'n ddaethu
lleol y byddaf i'n ei gwybod, ymlaen gyda'r ddiddordeb y maes yn ymwneud a'r ddiddordeb yma.
Ond oeddwn i'r ffamau Rhys Hughes,
andolwg deill yn deiriau Force.
Byddwn yn mynd yn llawer a nesai i Se Ad stairs.
Felly, pan oeddwn i'n angen i'w gael ymlaenau'r bwnt, roeddwn i'n mynd i'r Greene i mi.
Roeddwn i'n dweud, well, mae'n mynd o'r ystafell yno, a'r ystafell yno, a'r ystafell yno, a'r ystafell yno.
A dyna'r ffordd rydym wedi'i mynd i'w mynd i'w mynd.
Roeddwn i'n gwybod y map a'n gallu gysylltu'r ymlaen i'n gwybod, ond yn bwysig, roedd yn gwybod hynny'n fwy fwy o'n dda i'w gyd.
Roeddwn i'n mynd i'r ffordd rydym wedi'i mynd i'r ystafell a'r ystafell.
Felly roedd hi'n cael pobl gyda'r gwybodaeth a'r ystafell sydd wedi'i cael ei ddod yn ymlaen.
Why would the forest have a shepherd?
Well, there were sheep everywhere, all over the mountain.
Basically all the farmers had sheep.
Thousands and thousands of acres.
Well, there were thousands and thousands of acres.
The number of sheep per acre was very small in terms of being two or three per acre.
But overall there were a lot of sheep.
Now, when we were preparing an area for planting, the first thing we needed was to take the sheep off the land, fence the land, take the sheep out.
And then when we planted the ground we had to keep the sheep out because the sheep ate the plants.
There were little trees in the ground.
If you didn't take the sheep off, as the ground got hard and the snow came down, of course the sheep had nothing else to browse on except for the trees.
And therefore we had to keep the sheep off the planted ground.
And that's what the shepherd did.
And did he experience?
He didn't actually look after the sheep.
His job was to keep the sheep off the planted land.
But were there problems because there was such a lot of acres up there and such a lot of sheep?
Were these sheep owned by one farmer or was your shepherd being able to separate them as that belongs to that farm, etc.?
We're back again into knowledge and experience again.
Rhys knew everybody's node.
You could look at the sheep and you could tell who owned it.
He made a point of taking it back.
If he took it off our land, he took it back to the owner or at least put it back in the owner's land.
But the sheep kept to the...
It was amazing basically that the sheep seemed to know which land they belonged to and they kept to their side of the land.
Of course when we planted, we fenced off certain areas, then the sheep had a tendency to try and get back onto that land, which was land that they'd grazed over many years probably.
But no, we got on very well with most of the neighbours.
It was actually amazing basically.
There was a neighbour called Mr Jones from Dalgwch who I understood at the time he was in his 80s and there was nothing to see him early in the morning even before we got there.
He was on horseback going round his sheep early in the morning.
He was absolutely amazing basically.
Although we never really... We planted a lot of Dalgwch.
I was a part of Tawi Centre.
Dalgwch was my area, the area that I looked after and the area that I started planting back in the 1960s.
Felly byddwn i'n bwysig i ddweud yna bod gan gael y cyfle yma trwy'r llyfr, mae'n cael ymddygiad am y gwasanaeth a'r ffarfyr?
Well yes, we knew the neighbours.
We got to know it was one of the things that everybody knew everybody in that area.
You take together the Pantrwy de Deged, you find that especially in the 60s, everybody knew everybody.
Everybody knew who lived where and when and who was related to who and what happened.
So even when I went in as a stranger, if they didn't know you they'd come and ask you who the hell are you?
And you'd get to know them and therefore gradually you'd get to know people.
One of the things that we used to do annually with John Jones was to go to an android for lunch on the day that they were doing cheering.
It was an annual thing that John Jones would come and pick me up and we'd go down for lunch and you'd meet all the local farmers.
So you'd get to know them not just by name but you could put a face to it and get to know them personally.
So that if there was any problem that was arising with fencing or sheep or whatever, then they would talk to you personally.
Therefore you'd get to know them and you'd sort out any problems that you had face to face.
The problem never really arose. Not only did I get to know all the people there but people like John Jones who'd been there for many years knew them all.
Reece Hughes who was the shepherd knew everybody. So if there was a problem with fencing or with sheep or whatever, they would get in touch with them.
They would get in touch with them, he'd come and talk to me and we'd sort out whatever the problem was.
As far as the neighbours were concerned, we were all one big reasonably happy family basically.
It was quite amusing at times. Basically, Mr Jones came around one day on his horse and we were fencing off a bit of land that we were going to plant next year.
Although the commission had bought all his land, he was still grazing it.
I was now marking out temporary fencing areas in between what we would fence this year and what we would plant next year.
Although I wanted to take the fence down a straight line which would have taken some of his grazing away,
he wanted us to follow another route which would have given him a little bit of extra fencing.
We talked about it and we came to a compromise so we put a bit of a bend in it. He was happy and I was happy.
It was a very rough, coarse grass area. It wasn't particularly a good area.
It was still important to Mr Jones that he was losing this half an acre of land or whatever it was of rough grazing for his sheep.
From my point of view, it was costing us a little bit more to get the fencing done than I would have liked if we'd gone in a straight line.
But we came to a compromise. We agreed that maybe we should change the line somewhat and keep everybody happy.
So there was good communication basically between the neighbours and that is perhaps something that maybe we're now losing in that the staff are getting more concentrated in and around the office area where they live.
In those days there were a lot of small forests scattered all over and the foresters or the management lived within the community in which case you got to know everybody.
But it's almost like every other institution, the personal touch is gone.
Yes, there's an evolution in terms of how things are changing. We're having to change basically to meet present day demands basically and the costs have to be kept under control.
Geraint, did you come across any problems relating to the purchase of land from farmers in the Tawai area? Was there any controversy or how did you find it?
Not personally, no. I met a lot of people and yes, there was of course, as there has always been, if there's any change.
Yes, there are people who have grievance and people who object. But in general, I think that there was a changeover taking place in that the older people, the older farmer in the community up in the tops would farm there for a number of years, for many, many years probably all their lives to some extent.
We're now getting to a stage where they would like to have passed it on to their children, but their children started having other thoughts because it wasn't the best of places to be in. For eight months of the year, it was a pretty bleak sort of place to work and a place to shepherd the sheep.
So I think that the next generation, we're looking at perhaps going further down into the valley and buying. So if they could sell the land, even though they were selling it by thousands of acres maybe at the time to the Forestry Commission who were really prepared to buy it, then they could use that money to buy an alternative farm down in the valleys where they could, instead of having the number of acres to the sheep, they could have the number of sheep to the acres.
They could have made a bigger and therefore earn the same return for a much easier and a better life basically than trying to live on land that was so far away from everywhere.
The forestry also brought some additional compensation basically in terms of we built roads which gave access to any remaining land up on the mountain much easier.
It brought trees which gradually grew and gave a lot of shelter which meant that there was better grass growth there, there was shelter for the animals, for the sheep and therefore it could probably improve the quality and the number of sheep that they could keep on the mountain as well.
So I'm sure that some of the younger or the new generation of farmers who were thinking ahead, there was benefits to be brought by having forestry up there.
The drawback was, and it's still the same, was that here we are planting Sitka spruce everywhere and there were these blankets of woodland of Sitka spruce going to cover the whole of the mountains.
Yes, this was very true and at that time we did blanket it in terms of planting the main species that we planted in the 60s that I was there, or Sitka spruce.
We planted a little bit of lushbore pine in the peat bogs, we planted a little bit of larch on the drier slopes, but in essence it was all Sitka spruce.
Well that's changed now, the whole policy has changed now, we're looking at landscaping, we're looking at the diversity of species, we're looking at wildlife, we're looking at conservation, recreation and all the rest of it.
At that time, back in the 1960s, it was a commercial proposition that we were aiming for in terms of planting trees to provide timber for the future.
And that timber, the best species for planting to get reasonable growth and reasonable returns was Sitka spruce.
So would you identify that as the biggest change in your era then, rather than this blanket with these green trees?
Absolutely, absolutely. In the first few years that I was planting up on the top of Tauwyd, it never occurred to me to plant any broadleafs, any hardwoods, it never occurred to me to do any landscaping,
it never occurred to me to think of conservation or recreation or whatever. Okay, there were black grouse and things up there, which you wouldn't find in many other areas.
It was a species of bird that was very, very rare, but we didn't identify that, we didn't do anything to help, to encourage it, to help it to exist.
We just planted trees. The object of my exercise was to get every small square metre of land planted up, because I was looking at it from a commercial point of view and saying,
well, I'm going to put so many trees on this because in 20, 30, 40, 50 years from now I'll be able to reap the returns that this will bring me.
But it was only in many terms, and therefore my attitude was totally different from what it is now.
It was the end product you were looking for?
Absolutely, absolutely. We were a factory farming trees, basically, and that's changed now into saying, and that's much more to forestry than just planting trees.
Now we look at it in terms of what other benefits can forestry bring to the general public, to the people of Wales, and to the people of Tregarwm and Pondry and Windyguide in particular.
So there's been a huge change in emphasis, basically, as to how we approach and work forestry.
I spent a few years in Llyfrgell as a planning manager, and my job and my team was to plan for the future, plan on how we were going to fell the trees that had already been planted,
how we were going to restock and replant some of these areas, whether we were going to plant some of it, whether we were going to plant it with a different variety of species rather than just sitka spruce and not popine.
How could we improve the wildlife habitats that we had, and how we could make the areas more accessible to people in terms of recreation, in terms of conservation.
Do you remember the era of the red kite, when it was very much protected?
Well, when I first went there, there was no red kite in the area. When we go back to the 1960s, there was a red kite, which was something I'd never heard of, basically.
Gradually, the red kite appeared in the Pondry and Windyguide area and Tregarwm area, and it's gradually, over the years, has spread and increased in the numbers.
I can remember, initially they were saying there was only a dozen pairs or something that they could find in the whole of Wales now that were into the hundreds.
In fact, I'm living now in Carmarthen, and it was only yesterday that I actually saw a red kite out the back here. So it's spread and it's...
Do you remember people looking, protecting these nests up there?
No, I don't. No, I mean at the time, back in the 60s when I was there, even in the 80s, there wasn't...
The red kite hadn't spread that far. It was gradually working its way down towards Llandafri.
But basically, it was around the Tregarwm area and the Pondry and Windyguide Distruglir area that there were these few pairs that were breeding.
What is the age cycle of a typical spruce that you've planted and growing?
Well, it varies quite considerably. Basically, we were looking at it at the economic cycle in the early years, and that would have been somewhere around 45 or 50 years.
Now, that to some extent has changed because our attitude again has changed, as I was saying, just now about diversity.
We're now looking for a diversity of age within the forest as a whole.
In other words, we would like to have trees of one year old up to 50 year olds up to 100 year olds.
So to get that, then we have to vary the age at which we fell trees.
Just to give you an example, one of the first areas that I planted in 1965 when I first went there as a forester was an area in Difus, which is in Tewi Centre.
That area was felled in the middle 90s, which means that it was 30 year old when it was felled.
There are other areas there which were planted at around about the same time and are still standing.
So those planted in the early 60s are now getting on for 40 years.
Some of them will be kept even longer than that, so that we have a diversity of age for the trees all through the forest.
So this is something that's changed completely from.
We started thinning in Tewi Forest in 1978.
This was done in Dala of the older trees that were planted in 1954.
Gradually we worked our way through Tewi Forest and the Tewi North, as we used to call the estrid fli of the Pant of Edwin areas.
Then thinning was started there in the early 80s and carried on since.
We started filling, that is clear filling some of the trees, which were due to wind blow basically back in the early 80s as well.
Gradually that's expanded in that forest design plans which we now work into.
We took into account all sorts of things in addition to the age of the trees so that we got all this diversity that we were looking for.
So we've been filling trees all over Tewi Forest basically, but in a planned form rather than in relation to age.
Do you know these diversity of age of trees?
Is that because of what they were to be used for eventually or is that because of what you wanted left in the forest?
Well, in the beginning the sequence was that you planted the trees and 20 to 25 years later they were due for thinning depending on the rate of growth.
You went in and you thinned them and then you thinned them every five years or so on the thinning cycle until they came to the age of about 40, 45 or 50 years.
At that stage the trees that are left were the big trees and the best trees because you thinned out the smaller trees and the weaker trees and badly formed trees.
So that you had the best trees scattered over the area and the bigger trees left at the age of 45 or 50.
So you've clear felt then that you started the cycle again. You've replanted it and then the cycle restarted.
It was to a great extent to meet the economic requirements really because the bigger trees were of greater value to us because they went into milling timber or construction timber and what have we.
Whilst the smaller trees were principally into pulpboard or fence material.
It changed somewhat over the years in that if we went for this diversity then trees that we felled at 30 year old weren't as big as those that were felled when they were 50 year old.
There were trees that had not been thinned because of the ground conditions and the windiness of the area that we were in.
Then we wouldn't thin them because of the danger of getting wind blow.
So in order to minimise the possibility of getting wind blow we wouldn't thin them.
The ones that were not thinned tended to get felled earlier because of the danger of having wind blow.
Whilst the ones that were grew on the better ground grew faster, gave us bigger trees and we kept them longer.
The object will be to keep trees as long as we possibly can in certain areas, in the sheltered areas, in the areas with better ground.
So that we get this diversity of big trees, small trees and more hubby which will encourage the wildlife basically.
It will also add to the amenity and the landscape value of the land.
A hefyd yn ymwneud â'r cyfleoedd, mae pobl sy'n mynd ymlaen i gyd yn ymwneud â llwybr, llwybr bach, llwybr ymwneud â llwybr ymwneud â llwybr, a phwyaf o'r cyfleoedd.
Felly, er bodwn yn ymwneud â'r historydd o'r ffordd gyda'r prosiect hwn, rwy'n gwybod oherwydd y queillwch chi,
Felly, mae'n dweud y byddwn yn edrych ar gyfer y gwaith yn newid yn y glas, yn fwy o bwynt yn y dyfodol?
O'n iawn, o'n iawn, rwy'n credu bod os ydyn ni yn ôl yn, neu os ydyn ni yn ôl yn, ymlaen, 20 mlynedd o amser, y bydd y gwaith yn newid yn fwy o bwynt yn y dyfodol.
Mae'r llwybr brod, sydd wedi bod yn cael ei chymryd, yn cymryd i ddod o'r ffordd, yn y gofn, yn y gofn ymlaen,
bydd yna fwyaf o dynion, mae'r llwybr yn ei wneud yn y ddod yn fwy o ffordd yn y ddod o'r hynny.
Byddwn yn gweithio'r blancet o'r sprws y byddwn yn cael.
Why do you think that this wasn't done then in the 50s and 60s?
Well the whole attitude was changed, basically it was all, first admissions objectives was to have a reserve of timber.
Therefore you planted the timber, the tree that would grow best on that soil at that altitude.
And that turned out to be Sytka Sprws.
And therefore, anywhere where we thought Sytka Sprws would grow best, we would plant Sytka Sprws.
The alternatives in terms of larch and multiple pine would only come about if the soil and ground conditions warranted it.
So we would plant Sytka Sprws blankets on it.
But the object of the exercise was to have a reserve of timber, to make up for all the timber that was felled in the first and second world war time.
So the government objectives changed basically.
And now with the Assembly, basically other factors have taken over from the economic aspect, although the economic aspect is still important.
Other aspects have taken on a much greater emphasis really than they were back in the 1950s and 1960s.
I understand Geraint, you were involved in a bit of a drama up on the mountains there.
Well, yeah, there was a murder actually that occurred in the early 80s up on the mountains within Togby Forest area.
And I was asked to go down and meet the police at the incident room.
And they were looking for this person who they thought had been involved.
And they knew that he was somewhere up on the mountains.
They thought he was somewhere up on the mountains.
Of course within the area, Togby Forest area, there were a number of cabins that we used in for wet weather.
There was a number of derelict houses which the Commission had bought over the years.
And although the police knew the location of some of these, they didn't know out all of them.
And therefore I had to spend a day with a number of policemen, a number of police dogs, a number of guns.
We went round all of these derelict houses, these cabins and sheds that we had about this.
So that I could identify where they were and for them to go in and see if this person was there or had been there over the few days that they'd been looking for.
We didn't actually find anybody. It turned out in the end that he had actually gone from the area.
But that was quite an interesting day basically.
Were you frightened?
I kept that out of the way basically.
They were very methodical and knew exactly what they were doing in that you would initially send the dogs in and the dogs would identify as to whether the place was empty or not.
And when they found that it was empty then they went in and cleared the place out.
Then I went in and had a look round just to see if anything had moved or changed or something that was there or that shouldn't have been there or something that wasn't there that should have been there or whatever.
But we didn't really find anything or anybody.
Did they catch up with this chap?
They did eventually, yes. He was arrested and convicted but nothing to do with me I'm afraid.
Do you know where they found him?
He'd gone from the area across into Llanwrtyd and spent a night in Llanwrtyd as I understand it.
Then he went down to Hampshire and I think they eventually arrested him at Hampshire.
He was charged and taken to court and convicted for the murder.
You've got a couple of interesting tales Geraint.
Well yes, interesting. I found them quite interesting and even frightening at the time.
The first one relates to a farmer who rang up one day and said,
I've got a field next to one of your plantations, I want to control burn it.
I want to burn the dead grass.
He'd grown quite roughly over it and wanted to burn it off so the fresh grass would come up earlier.
So he said, yes, okay, we'll come along and we'll help you control burn a strip along the forestry to protect the forest
and we'll meet you there at sort of 11 o'clock in the morning. I think it was a nice Sunday.
So we turned up and the whole lorry load of us got out and we met the farmer and everything was okay.
Then all of a sudden the farmer got on his horse and he had behind him on a piece of rope a piece of sacking
which he must have dumped in some excellent paraffin or something.
He'd only lit this sacking and off he went through his horse.
Now this wasn't what we called control burning because across the mountain he went with this burnt sacking sack on fire behind him
and we were supposed to keep control over this fire.
Our intention was to burn a little bit at a time, sort of 10 metres and put it out, another 10 metres and put it out.
Oh no, he was hundreds and hundreds of yards away and there was a whole ring of fire.
So we all panicked and chased after it and put the fire out as best as we could.
It frightened the life out of me and I think that it frightened the life out of everybody else
because this wasn't control burning, there was no control at all.
The other incident that happened, I wasn't personally involved with it, but John Jones who was the forester in Tully North,
went for a walk round the woods one evening and came across this little campfire
and in this campfire were three or four people dressed in a type of army uniform or something.
It turned out they were the Free Wales Army and the Free Wales Army were on manoeuvres by the Rwyd, all four or five of them.
They were camping out on forestry land near the stream near Pantybedwen.
John, the member of the local army cadets force, sat down and duly talked to them.
Mark was here with them, he didn't talk about tactics and manoeuvres with them,
but it seemed as if they were spending the weekend up in the mountains having manoeuvres on behalf of the Free Wales Army.
I don't know whether they had real guns or didn't have real guns.
All I can say is that a number of weeks later John was visited by a senior detective from Aberystwyth wanting to know what was going on
because I think a farmer had complained that he'd found a sheep that had been shot up in the mountain and the police were making inquiries.
I don't think I would have had the guts that John Jones had to go and talk to these people who were pretty amateurish in terms of their army experience.
But John being the character that he was, I almost felt at home with him.
How many people were employed? When I went there in 1965 I think there were somewhere in the region of 40 to 45 people being employed there.
Those were the people who were permanently employed there. There were people who came in the tenants, as we used to call them,
who came in to do ploughing, added two, three or four, added extra people to it.
Also the roads people, the civil engineering branch came in, I would bring another 20 or so people in at certain periods of time when they were building roads around the Tully Forest area.
I think that at one time we used to make the pay for about 60 to 65 people at the maximum.
This was back again in and around the 1960s. Since then recruitment has been slowed down and it's came to nothing really.
People have left and people have retired and people have left for all sorts of reasons.
Until I think now that we probably employ no more than one directly employed person within the Tully Forest area then.
Because Tully has now been allocated into a delivery forest district.
So it covers a very large area and the delivery forest district covers a large area and Tully is only basically a part of it.
But that's the huge change that has taken place from the early 50s and 60s when they used to apply a large number of people into the small area that Tully Forest was at the time.
Simply because there was planting in Prep Ground going on there, we were planting in the region of 1,000 acres per year at the height.
I think that it grew to something like 11,000 to 12,000 hectares eventually.
So it was quite a large forest area concentrated basically between Plandyr Mwyn in the south and Pontrwyf in the north, Tugadol in the west and the Elan Valley watershed in the east.
It was all concentrated in that sort of area.
But that's one of the big changes that has taken place in the 50s and 60s.
It employed a large number of people coming from Pontrwyf in Deguyd, Tregaron, Llanderwy Brefi and Rhondda Mwyn.
I suppose one of my claims to fame as far as North Tully is concerned is that I was responsible for the first clear felling of trees.
This was on the part of the plant of Edwinessdau in that trees had been planted there probably privately before the commission started back in, I can't remember exactly,
but somewhere around the early 1920s.
There was a block of larch in one of the fields from the Pant of Edwain croft area of Pant of Edwain.
They were quite large trees, they had been well thinned.
In the late 1960s we sold the timber off to Lampeter Sawmills and we felled the timber and took them out to roadside and stacked them at the side of the road best that we could.
Lorry's came in and collected them and took them away.
My claim to fame would be that I was responsible for the first clear felling in Tully Forest.
So that would have been the first commercial venture in a way then?
It was the first real income that we had acquired from the forest district, from the felling of trees in the late 60s.